Updating locales on iOS (#274)
flodolo/documentation: src/products/iOS_products/updating_locales.md

# Updating locales for specific projects

These are the instructions to update locales on iOS mobile products, currently living within the [Firefox for iOS project](https://github.com/mozilla-l10n/firefoxios-l10n), and in the [Focus for iOS project](https://github.com/mozilla-l10n/focusios-l10n).

## Prerequisites to adding a locale

First, you will have to check that the locale is available within the iOS system settings. iOS currently supports two tiers of locales, and a locale must be part of one of these two lists in order to ship on Firefox for iOS. Unlike Firefox for Android, there’s no locale switcher included in the app, so it’s possible to ship only locales that are supported by iOS.

> To tell if a locale is supported or not, take a look on an actual device, under the Language Settings of the most recent iOS version available. Tier one locales are the ones listed under “iPod/iPhone/iPad Language”, and Tier 2 locales appear under “Other Language” (or “Add Language” if there are already some languages under that list). If a locale appears under none of these two lists, then it should be safe to assume the language is not supported by iOS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To tell if a locale is supported or not, take a look on an actual device, under the Language Settings of the most recent iOS version available. Tier one locales are the ones listed under “iPod/iPhone/iPad Language”, and Tier 2 locales appear under “Other Language” (or “Add Language” if there are already some languages under that list). If a locale doesn’t appear in any of these lists, then it is currently not supported by iOS.
```

I think we can remove the assumption part.

## Updating locales in Pontoon

Once you’ve determined if the locale can be added you must go to Pontoon to update the list of current locales. If the locale is not [available](https://pontoon.mozilla.org/teams/) in Pontoon yet, [consult this document](../../tools/pontoon/adding_new_locale.md) for instructions on how to add it.

> The place in Pontoon where you can add and remove locales is located on the same admin project page each time: [here](https://pontoon.mozilla.org/admin/projects/firefox-for-ios/) for Firefox for iOS, and [here](https://pontoon.mozilla.org/admin/projects/focus-for-ios/) for Focus for iOS. Pontoon syncs every 10min approximately, so the project will be availble after the next [Pontoon sync](https://pontoon.mozilla.org/sync/log/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Pontoon, you can add and remove locales from the admin project page: [here](https://pontoon.mozilla.org/admin/projects/firefox-for-ios/) for Firefox for iOS, and [here](https://pontoon.mozilla.org/admin/projects/focus-for-ios/) for Focus for iOS. The project will be availble after the next [Pontoon sync](https://pontoon.mozilla.org/sync/log/).
```

# Updating locales for specific projects

> These are the instructions to update locales on iOS mobile products, currently living within the [Firefox for iOS project](https://github.com/mozilla-l10n/firefoxios-l10n), and in the [Focus for iOS project](https://github.com/mozilla-l10n/focusios-l10n).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These are the instructions to update locales on iOS mobile products, currently living within the [Firefox for iOS](https://github.com/mozilla-l10n/firefoxios-l10n), and in the [Focus for iOS](https://github.com/mozilla-l10n/focusios-l10n) projects.
```

Feels like this reads a little better.

## Prerequisites to adding a locale

> First, you will have to check that the locale is available within the iOS system settings. iOS currently supports two tiers of locales, and a locale must be part of one of these two lists in order to ship on Firefox for iOS. Unlike Firefox for Android, there’s no locale switcher included in the app, so it’s possible to ship only locales that are supported by iOS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, you will have to check that the locale is available within the iOS system settings. iOS currently supports two tiers of locales, and a locale must be part of one of these two lists in order to ship on Mozilla products for iOS. Unlike Mozilla products for Android, there’s no locale switcher included in the app, so it’s possible to ship only locales that are supported by iOS.
```

Missed that this would ignore Focus.

To tell if a locale is supported or not, take a look on an actual device, under the Language Settings of the most recent iOS version available. Tier one locales are the ones listed under “iPod/iPhone/iPad Language”, and Tier 2 locales appear under “Other Language” (or “Add Language” if there are already some languages under that list). If a locale doesn’t appear in any of these lists, then it is currently not supported by iOS.

## Updating locales in Pontoon

Once you’ve determined if the locale can be added you must go to Pontoon to update the list of current locales. If the locale is not [available](https://pontoon.mozilla.org/teams/) in Pontoon yet, [consult this document](../../tools/pontoon/adding_new_locale.md) for instructions on how to add it.

> In Pontoon, you can add and remove locales from the admin project page: [here](https://pontoon.mozilla.org/admin/projects/firefox-for-ios/) for Firefox for iOS, and [here](https://pontoon.mozilla.org/admin/projects/focus-for-ios/) for Focus for iOS. The project will be availble after the next [Pontoon sync](https://pontoon.mozilla.org/sync/log/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Pontoon, you can add and remove locales from the admin project page: [here](https://pontoon.mozilla.org/admin/projects/firefox-for-ios/) for Firefox for iOS, and [here](https://pontoon.mozilla.org/admin/projects/focus-for-ios/) for Focus for iOS. The project will be available after the next [Pontoon sync](https://pontoon.mozilla.org/sync/log/).
```

(missed the typo in the first pass)

### Adding locales

> Once you have added a new locale in Pontoon, there is nothing more to do in order to get the locale into Nightly builds. This should happen automatically within 24-48 hours. To check that the locale is indeed now set up in the repository, you can check that its correspoding locale folder has been created [here](https://github.com/mozilla-l10n/firefoxios-l10n) for Firefox for iOS and [here](https://github.com/mozilla-l10n/focusios-l10n) for Focus for iOS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you have added a new locale in Pontoon, there is nothing more to do in order to get the locale into Nightly builds. This should happen automatically within 24-48 hours. To check that the locale is indeed now set up in the repository, you can check that its correspoding locale folder has been created [here](https://github.com/mozilla-l10n/firefoxios-l10n) for Firefox for iOS and [here](https://github.com/mozilla-l10n/focusios-l10n) for Focus for iOS.
```

I think we should take for granted that Pontoon will write to the l10n repository, otherwise we are in trouble. My point in the 1st review is how do we make sure that the locale made it to code repository.

This is not trivial, that's why there is a script running to try and guess (not perfect)
https://github.com/mozilla-l10n/firefoxios-l10n#locales-in-build
https://github.com/mozilla-l10n/focusios-l10n#locales-in-build

Another method is looking for the pull request that imports translations in the code repository, and verify if it creates files for that new locale.

Author: I still kept the part about Pontoon writing to the l10n repo but can take it out if it's just useless

> The locale will then ride the trains to release. The iOS release calendar follows closely the Android and Firefox desktop calendar, which can be found [here](https://whattrainisitnow.com/release/?version=release).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The locale will then ride the trains to release. The iOS release calendar follows closely the Android and Firefox desktop calendar, which can be found [here](https://whattrainisitnow.com/).
```

I would point to the main website instead of data for the release channel.

### Removing locales

Once you have removed a new locale from Pontoon, the existing locale folder then needs to be removed from the l10n repository, and all files should also be removed from the code repository.

> As a mozilla-l10n code owner, you should be able to delete this folder yourself from the mozilla-l10n repo.

Reviewer: Worth specifying that this should be done via pull request, so it's easy to track the removal in case we need to change our mind.

> Then, file an issue on Github ([here](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/firefox-ios) for Firefox for iOS, and [here](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/focus-ios) for Focus for iOS), so that the mobile team can work on removing their corresponding files. Once the issue is filed, and if you don't get any traction after a few days, you can ask for help in the #mobile-xfnl-leads Slack channel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, file an issue on Github ([here](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/firefox-ios) for Firefox for iOS, and [here](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/focus-ios) for Focus for iOS), so that the mobile team can work on removing their corresponding files. Once the issue is filed, and if you don't get any traction after a few days, you can ask for help in the `#mobile-xfnl-leads` Slack channel.
```

## Updating locales in Pontoon

Once you’ve determined if the locale can be added you must go to Pontoon to update the list of current locales. If the locale is not [available](https://pontoon.mozilla.org/teams/) in Pontoon yet, [consult this document](../../tools/pontoon/adding_new_locale.md) for instructions on how to add it.

In Pontoon, you can add and remove locales from the admin project page: [here](https://pontoon.mozilla.org/admin/projects/firefox-for-ios/) for Firefox for iOS, and [here](https://pontoon.mozilla.org/admin/projects/focus-for-ios/) for Focus for iOS. The project will be available after the next [Pontoon sync](https://pontoon.mozilla.org/sync/log/).

### Adding locales

Once you have added a new locale in Pontoon, there is nothing more to do in order to get the locale into Nightly builds. This should happen automatically within 24-48 hours. To check that the locale is indeed now set up in the l10n repository, you can check that its correspoding locale folder has been created [here](https://github.com/mozilla-l10n/firefoxios-l10n) for Firefox for iOS and [here](https://github.com/mozilla-l10n/focusios-l10n) for Focus for iOS.

> To check that the locale made in into the code repository, there is a script running (note that this method may not always be 100% reliable): [here](https://github.com/mozilla-l10n/firefoxios-l10n#locales-in-build) for Firefox for iOS and [here](https://github.com/mozilla-l10n/focusios-l10n#locales-in-build) for Focus for iOS. A more reliable method would be to look for the pull request that imports translations in the code repository, and verify that it created files for that new locale.

Reviewer: A reminder that a simple line break doesn't do what you think it does (it's equivalent to a space). You can see it [here](https://github.com/mozilla-l10n/documentation/blob/6b7fdd7f8204d874d886cc5c42d0e8d377d5071c/src/products/iOS_products/updating_locales.md), where this section is a massive block of text.

Author: Thanks for catching that!
